There's always that. In any organization, you
have that problem. But anyway, you wanted to go
back to the origination of what the conference
was. How about your getting up to Texas A&M, if you
don't mind? How did that happen? Well, I'll tell
you how it happened. My mother wanted me to become a
doctor. So my mother died early. But anyway, I had
planned on going to Rice. So I was there. Accepted
at Rice. But that summer, I went over to Louisiana
to work in oil fields. Where did you work in
Louisiana? I worked in Vinton, Louisiana, in some
little wells my brother had, Johnny had. And then I
decided I wanted to become a program engineering
geologist. So then I changed. Instead of going to
Rice, I registered at A&M. and started to take a
program in engineering and geology. And that's
how I came to A&M. Had the brother been there or
anyone in the family at all? Johnny was a graduate
of A&M and so was my older brother. He had gone for a
year and then went over to Texas. And Johnny was a
chemical engineer graduate of A&M. He was about
seven years my senior. He worked for Exxon. Then he
was out busy drilling a few little wells, working
over wells. He left Exxon by the time I was a senior
in high school. And that summer before school
started, the university started, and I went
there. I'd gone back to... to my school at
Galveston, even after I graduated a year because I
was too young, too small, and I had to take a third
year of Latin to be able to qualify for taking
pre-med or whatever to go to Rice. So I went back.
But I was now taking also trigonometry and solid
geometry. So I did so well in those, I decided I'd be
an engineer and geologist when I decided to get
into oil and gas. Brother did straight geology.
Did you ride the train up to College Station, or how
did you go? Yeah, I rode the train when I went to
College Station, and I may have heard it because
when I talked to the, I think to one of the
graduation things at A&M, I'd mentioned that when
I got off the train, because my aunt put me on the
train in Houston. She drove up from Galveston, put
me on the train. I drove up, and I had to get off all
alone, 16-year-old kid, Walking across the
campus, wondering what the hell was going to
happen. It was a long walk, huh? A long walk. Up that
hill. You know, from the old train station over to
campus there. But it was a very nostalgic memory.
But anyway, A&M was a great school. And, you know,
for $450 a year, I could go to school in a room and
board and everything. And it was tough. And my
father didn't have any money. I'd have to do some
work in the mess hall. And I built bookshelves. And
I was cleaning and pressing laundry. And I had a
candy concession where the damn football players
would steal all the time and not pay me. And then I
did, it was tough the first couple of years, but I
managed to get by. And the last year, I made money. I
made more money when I graduated than I got from
Amical when I went to work for them. I developed, I
was the one who originated the stationery that had
its beautiful gold and embossed field artillery
and signal corps. I originated that. In fact,
there's some sheets of that in the archives. It
used to be just plain print, maroon print on the
white paper. So I got a San Antonio printer. who
developed that for me, and then I had an agent in
every dormitory. And I was making $300 a month when
I got it from school, and I only took a $126 salary at
A&M University. I mean, at Amical University,
Amical, in South Louisiana. So I took a cut in
salary to leave A&M. But that, I wanted to take
engineering, and I didn't want to go in the Army. I
knew the war was coming on. We all knew that, but I
wanted to get some experience. So what I decided,
even though I was offered a full commission
because... I had excellent grades, and I was in
battalion command and everything at A&M, but I
didn't want to get in the service. The war hadn't
come on. But I was a reserve officer, and then when I
was in South Louisiana, I think it was September
before the war, they called me to active duty. I
went with the Corps of Engineers, and I did all
construction on Dixon Gun Plant, Sergeant Ernest
Depot, all these airfields around Texas here.
with the Corps of Engineers. So I got tremendous
experience. I ended up first lieutenant,
supervising 150 people. And you were mainly
involved in construction. Mainly engineering
and construction. Engineering officer, what I
was, assistant engineering officer. And
therefore, I got great experience. And then when
the war ended, I lost four and a half years. So I just
came to Houston and decided, to hell with it. I lost
all my contemporaries that stayed with the
company for some reason or other because of being
classified as 4F. They had come up, and they ranked
pretty well in the company. And the company
offered me a job, because they thought I was a good
engineering geologist. And I had been involved in
South Louisiana, which was a tremendous field for
Amaco. It was called Stanley in the old days,
Stanley Oil and Gas. And they had a tremendous
operation there. And I had a lot of experience in
the year and a half that I was down. So therefore, I
came to Houston and said, this is where I want to set
up and become a consultant. Were you in
production, primarily, or exploration? I was in
exploration, geology, and production. They had
exploitation engineers, you see. And we did all
the exploitation. And we didn't do the basic
regional geology. We did the exploitation
geology and engineering, too. So I did both,
because my background was both. And therefore,
when I came to Houston, My brother had come here
also, and he had some friends. And I was able to get
six people to fund me $50 each with a little
override to see if I could find oil and gas for them.
And that was it. And I would do the deals. I'd do the
geology and engineering, and then I'd get my
brother and my partner. That's all we had, one girl
in the office with us. They'd go down to Esperson
Drugstore and sell the deals. Were you doing any
seismograph work, or how were you doing? No, I
would do subsurface geology. In fact, when it
first started, we had so little money. None of you
may have heard this before. I had a friend called
John Todd who had a Cambie blueprint, and I
couldn't afford to buy the logs. So I'd borrow the
logs at 6 o'clock. I'd work about 3 in the morning,
and I'd bring them back for 8 o'clock. He wouldn't
charge me. And I'd do some of my geology to start
with, you see. So that's the way. And then we would
get people at Bacchus for 32nd overriding
interest. Eventually, we'd get more. And
eventually, we'd get a quarter in that front. We'd
get big people like Bob Smith. And we had all the
Jewish people in town taking deals for us called
the Big Nine. Oh, they were good, too. Wine
Gardens, all the Jewish people that you know, the
Battlesteins, they're all to Oshkosh. And you
were working this area primarily? We were working
the Gulf Coast region here. Except that we did work
some areas, just like our North Texas prospect
came to us from a Chicago bookie, believe it or not,
through one of my partners. That's a hell of a story
in itself. But he asked me to check, and I said,
hell, what the hell does a Chicago bookie know
about Texas Auto and Gas? He just had a deal, and I
found out it came to him through one of my friends
been trying to sell it, named Allison Miles. I
didn't know him, but he had gone to A&M. Had been
trying for two years to sell the deal. He couldn't
sell it to the Chicago bookie. He wanted to know if
we'd look at it. One of my participants called him,
General Pulaski. He wasn't a general, but they
called him that. He said, come on, you've got to
look at this deal. I said, well, all right,
General, I'll look at it. And that's where we made
one of the big discoveries on the Texas. So you
never know. No, you don't. But anyway. Did you ever
read that book about Petillo Higgins? No, I
haven't seen that book there. I haven't read that
one. It's quite a story. Did you ever know him? No, I
know of him, but I don't know him. Do you have the
book? David Norton was going to give it to you. I
think I have the book. I think you really enjoyed
that. Higgins did a great job on Spinal Tap.
There's no question. Quite an adventurer. Well,
oil and gas are that way. A lot of these people are
that way. But the oil and gas was good. We began
slowly, and we kept getting a little better and
better interest in it. We found a lot of oil and gas.
I did consulting work for Glenn McCarthy and a lot
of other people. Eddie Scurll, I'm glad, the
old-timers you've heard of. Floyd Carsten and
them, besides creating our own company. I was
doing both things. The consulting work, I'd do,
and I'd sell deals to them, make a little override
there. But we began to build our company. That's
where we really started our company. So most of the
oil and gas we had, we found most of it ourselves. So
that's the difference where we're at than most
companies. When did you organize? What was your
first company organized as, or when did you do
that? It was organized in 1946. That's when I came
in January of 46. It was organized probably in June
of 46. So you organized right away. You and I just
consulted. It was organized as Rock Soil. And
Rob's got some history on that. He's got some
history on that. In 46, and they had three
partners, and one guy named Jimmy Gray, after he
was in about six months, I was getting a little
overhyped for doing the work for them. He said, I
got a third interest. I'm going to Oklahoma. I'm
leaving. Do you want to buy it? So I got the
gentleman to back my note for $9,000. And he had a
little money in, so I bought him out for the third of
this little fledgling company that just started.
I think we had one well at Kaplan and one well at
North Kiran. So I bought my interest in it, and the
general helped me bank it. He signed my note for me.
So General Pulaski. But that's how I got in the
company. Then, of course, we started building the
company. In the meantime, I was also doing
consulting work for a number of people around here
that would pay me enough, because I had two kids
here and one on the way. In other words, it's very,
and I get that a little naive, to think that with a
year and a half experience, I could become a
consulting engineer and geologist. And that's
what I did. That's what you really did, yeah. But I
knew Houston was the place to be, so that's one
thing I picked the right place to be. That's when
things were taking over. There was a backlog of
prospects that couldn't drill wells during the
war because steel was unavailable. We were
furnishing all our allies with all the oil that
they had. And therefore, I knew that Houston was
the place to be. Then when did you organize
Mitchell Energy Development? Well, after the
oil, rock soil, then we created a company called I
think it's Christie, Mitchell, and Mitchell,
which is a successor to Rock Soil. And that was the
three partners, myself and my brother Johnny.
They were older than I was. And myself. They would
outsell the deals I'd do with the children in
engineering. And we finally hired a couple of
people to help us because we taught drilling
wells, making a few wells. And I would say we
organized that probably in the early 50 or 51,
Christie, Mitchell, and Mitchell. And then we
started making a lot of discoveries with Palacios
and North Texas in 53. And we've discovered a lot of
oil and gas reservoirs and fields. And then we
changed it to George Mitchell Associates. And
then in 72, we became Mitchell Engine Development
when we went public. That's when I first met Joe.
And when I went to Chicago to make presentations
to, he's working with Hershey, Rodman, and Druck.
to see if they thought that we could sell our
product to the investment community. You know,
whether they thought we had enough, whatever it
was. And they thought, you know, they helped us get
the information around the country. So that when
we went public, the stock sold when it was sold. Oh,
probably a third of the company, that's all that
was sold down, more than that. And my brother, I had
bought out most of his, and then I bought out my
other partner before that. My brother had about
20% of the company I had. more than that. And he
eventually sold most of his and did other things.
So then I ended up with most of the company,
probably 63%. What was your first experience in
real estate? Well, the first experience was very
interesting. First experience was, I guess, back
in 1961
or two. Someone, a person in Galveston I knew named
Spro, a woman, called me and said, I knew him in high
school, George, that my husband who just died left
some real estate to the Texas bank. We used to be in a
Texas bank down here where the Chronicle building
was.
Some husband, wasn't it? Society for the
Prevention of Frailty of Animals, yeah. She could
get the income, but then the property would go to
the dogs, so to speak. She said, they're getting
ready to sell these people, and they really got a
rip-off going on. And they got a piece out of the
memorial where those apartments are right there,
and then they had a piece... which is now an
industrial park of the Woodlands. That was before
we even conceded the Woodlands. Now, what year is
this, roughly? That was about 61 or 62. And so I
found out that the district judge in Conroe had
some sort, or at least where the trust head
department had to go, had a deal going on. So I
threatened the bank with a lawsuit for her
benefit, and that if I got it, I'd get a quarter of
their profits. And therefore, this land was split
up. The judge worked out a deal. that he would take
part of Deer Conroe and let us have 500 acres on the
edge of the well before he even didn't think it'd be
part of the woods. Had nothing to do with the woods.
For $49 an acre. And it had about a $50 acre of timber
on it. So we were able to buy it that way. Now that is
the first piece of real estate we had taken on. We
had done some doing with some housing development
with a person named Norman Dobbins back in 63, 64,
doing a little housing development in several
spots around the country, which we didn't make
money. We lost money on that. This was strictly as
an investment thing? Well, we were participating
with him trying to help make it work. He was pretty
good at design and creativity, but he was a very
poor businessman. So we had to And we lost money on
that, and we finally had to buy him out. But that
wasn't very much money. We were just playing with
it. We didn't do it. But about 62, 63, 64, then we had
bought Pelican Island about in 62 or 63. We worked
with A&M to take the A&M campus. We had looked at it.
But then I got in real estate that way because we
were using leverage and all of that. Pelican
Island, I had a deal made buying it from, Mary
Chapman Scott, they had about $10 million spent in
it. And they had a big lawsuit with the city. I was
able to solve the lawsuit, so I bought it for $1.8
million. But I had a deal with Shell to sell 50 acres
for about $1.6 million. So then I closed the deal. I
sold it. And I had $200,000 or $300,000 left in
Pelican Island. Then I promised to give A&M the
acres they had, the 100 acres they had for the
institute there. So then, of course, what got me
into really the woodlands It was about that time,
in 64, we'd have more oil. And this is all you had
done, though, in terms of land and development? We
knew in 62 that energy was in trouble. I knew in 62
that that's when they opened the floodgates and
all the Persian Gulf oil, Kuwait and Iran, and they
were driving us up a wall and importing oil. And the
price of oil was down to a quarter barrel. And I
could foresee, and that Laubel Railroad
Commission of Texas was only eight days for every
oil well. So we concentrated on gas because we knew
gas was going to be the future. So I concentrated
all our effort on gas. And knowing that unless we
did something else, we would probably be out of
business because we could see oil was going to be in
deep trouble as long as it continued flooding this
country with cheap oil. But you were discovering,
but you weren't trying to produce the gas. We were
discovering. We were producing. Oh, yeah, we
produced every foot we could get at $0.03 a
thousand. The first gas contract I made was $0.03 a
thousand at North Huron. And then it finally got up
to six or eight cents. That was a pretty good price
then. But we knew that gas was undervalued and we
could make deals with major companies to drill gas
properties easier than you could for oil
properties. So I thought gas was the future from
the standpoint of energy demand. And we
concentrated 80% of everything related to gas. So
we knew that. So then I started working on some of
our, brokers they're out with all these brokers
working for us you know 10 or 15 people they make it
if they make a deal they make a dollar they don't
make a deal with no money so they're starving to
death so i said well if you find a piece of real
estate up here you know where we can steal you know
we'll may try to figure out how to leverage
ourselves and buy it so when i had this piece of land
that i bought from the judge and the bank here that i
end up with that three or four acres out there i had
this um person that um Max Newland, who was a
forester up in that area, to cut the timber so we
could get some money. So he cut the timber on that
land, and I said, well, Max, if you know of a deal
that we could put together, leverage-wise, and
make a real good deal, because we don't have any
money, we have to use leverage, see what you can put
together. So he came in one day and he said, I'll
tell you what, there's a 50,000-acre block up here
called the Grogan, Cork, and Lumber Company. So
that may be possible. And David Bentley,
everybody had been trying to buy it for five years.
And the problem was they had three family groups.
They were down to cousins. The brothers had died
off. They had a big lumber mill that had burned
down, and they rebuilt it the same old-fashioned
way, which was not efficient. They were in
trouble. They had 80 heirs, some of them worth
several hundred thousand dollars, couldn't
afford a pack of cigarettes. And therefore, I
said, all right, let me see if I can't put this
together. So it took me two years and 62 or so to buy
the Grogan-Cocker-Lummet coming. I had to settle
those three lawsuits. I'm in three family groups
fighting. And I bought it for $125.25 an acre,
50,000 acres, of which only 4,000 were woodlands,
and the rest were scattered in the county. And the
reason that the way I figured the price, that I
could sell the timber to Louisiana Pacific, and I
had some minerals, So I figured the only thing I
could afford to pay would be $125 an acre, or about
$6 million for 50,000 acres, because I could pay
the interest on the Louisiana timber contract and
the minerals. And I got the Bank of Southwest at
that time. Harold Vance used to be my professor at
A&M, thought a lot of me. And he was able to say,
okay, I'll make you a loan if you can get a release on
the land, 20% release on the land, 15% payment. So I
got the Grover and Cochran heirs to give me a
release. Joe, you've probably never heard this
story. I've never heard of it. Release of the land
for paying 15%. And the bank gave me the money
because I didn't have the money. So then I took the
residual of the 50,000 acres and went to Great
Southern about six months later and made a full $6
million 20-year loan, just paid interest for 20
years so I could pay it off on timber. Well, that was
a land deal. It had nothing to do with the
woodlands. Now, who was Doolin with? the guy who
originally me and me and me myself and this max
newland who i then hired him to be my forester you
see and you ought to put his name down he can tell you
all right then then right
after that i found out about the foster lumber
company which is what kingwood is so i made a run at
that 50 000 more acres even though we're drilling
oil and gas wells over here for difficult times,
and I had to use leverage, you see. So I made a run at
them, and I was able to get 21% locked up for a dollar
a share. There were a bunch of heirs, and they were
in Kansas City, Missouri. I was after the company,
another 50,000 acres for myself. And I had a deal
made with the 21% at 125 an acre, 150 an acre on that
one. And then I got Boise Cascade, to come in for
half interest if they would put up the $750,000 I
needed to buy up to 51% and then dissolve the
company. But they wouldn't put it up unless I had an
option on the 51%. And the guys at 51% wouldn't do it
unless I had the money. So I couldn't quite do that.
And so what happened while I was negotiating with
it, Exxon and King Ranch moved in and paid them $300
an acre. That's where Kingwood is. But it was a bad
piece of land. I was going to red flag it, you know,
just sell it off for 10 acres, 20 francs. So that
went away. But we made, the company made, because
then I had 125 an acre and 115 an acre, and I sold it
for two or three to Exxon. So we made a million
dollars. I was really the first green male around
here. Now, when was the Foster, when we do... That
was about 62, 63, right after both the group and
Cochran. Yeah, okay. Now, there's no concept of
the Woodlands or anything. We've been piddling
with a little, a couple of these little
subdivisions around with Norman Dobbins called
Pace Center Home, but nothing of any magnitude.
Let me pause just one second now. Meanwhile, while
you're doing all of this, there is a lot of activity
going on down south around NASA and so forth. Are
you paying any attention to that or thinking about
it? Only that what happened at Exxon made a deal to
let them have that acreage down there, Frenswood
did, to the 5,000, whatever it is, through Lyndon
Johnson, to do the space thing. I didn't think that
had too much relation, except it meant that
Houston had another anchor besides just oil and
gas. But that was very embryonic at that time. Even
when the Woodlands first started, it was just
beginning. But they were able to start Clear Lake.
They'd already started Clear Lake before then.
Frenswood had it. But then when NASA came in, it
really made Clear Lake a lot better. They bought
Clear Lake. They didn't want the Clear Lake. They
bought it because of the oil field Exxon did, and
the West made them take the damn land at $100 an
acre. They didn't want the land, the 20,000 acres.
Well, they took it, and then they finally decided
to do Clear Lake because it was near the bay. And
then after a while, when they found out that there
was going to be a NASA, they worked on President
Johnson to get them to take whatever acres that
NASA got out of it as part of the deal to make Clear
Lake go, you see. And all the universities worked
with them. But we knew about it, and we knew it would
help Houston, but we thought it would have nothing
to do with it. So then we missed the Foster Lumber
Company deal. But we had the $50,000, I guess. So I
then started. I had Carl Kamrath start in 66. What
happened in the early 60s, 64, 65, we began to have
these terrible riots. The Vietnam War was on.
Bedford-Stuyvesant was having a riot up in New
York City. Watts was having a riot. And I went to
several of these YPO meetings to understand the
plight of our cities. They're all in desperate
shape. And what was happening in my reckoning,
that what was destroying our cities was the
proliferation of political subdivisions around
the central core, and they can't manage it. And
that there ought to be a better way to evolve an
area. But why did you get in? That's sort of
unusual. Here you are. Because the organization I
belong to called Young Presidents Organization.
Called what? Young Presidents Organization.
Whenever we went anywhere, we didn't talk about
business all the time. We talked about philosophy
and humanities. And we exposed ourselves to the
thoughts of really what makes a nation work. And
these are local CEOs? Well, it's a national
organization. It's a national organization. We
have about 30 members here. And then, you see, at
that time, our company was over worth more than a
couple million dollars. So if you had over 50
people or 100 people, you could qualify to be a
young president before you're 40. You had to have a
presidency before you're 40 years old or you don't
qualify. So there were a lot of entrepreneurs.
There were a lot of them that just inherited money,
and they're usually duds, mad because they don't
know what they did themselves or what their father
did for them. So this was a hell of an organization.
It really was. So therefore, I was exposed to
really wanting what was destroying our cities.
And then I got to thinking, well, why can't we do it
better? And what other place would be better to do
it than Houston? Because Houston was going to go to
5 million people. I knew that. I knew they were the
beauty, because I lived in Memorial by that time. I
finished my house. I lived in Memorial from 58 on.
When you came from service into Houston, you moved
into Houston. You didn't stay in the office. Oh,
no, I moved into Houston. I had an apartment my aunt
had because there were no apartments available,
and I ran that apartment house. Cynthia and I will
never do it again. We had to scrape these plaster
walls and paint the damn thing. I said, never again
will I do that. She agreed with me, but then it was
tough, and we had two kids and one other wife. So it
was tough. It was tough for her. But then I was able
to have a place to live here because my aunt was
here. And then the... We first moved in with her
mother, then I got the apartment, because I
managed the apartment on Elgin, on Fannin and
Elgin, that my aunt owned. So I was able to manage
the apartment, because there was no housing
available for a while. The first move was sent to
his mother for about a month and a half, until I got
the apartment, then we moved there, and then we had
to redo it ourselves. But later on, I bought a
house, so I started getting some royalties, so I
ended up building a house. I had Ford, Powell &
Carson design it from San Antonio, on North
McGregor. Beautiful area. Ford, who did it? Ford?
Ford Powell and Carson out of San Antonio. Neil
Ford designed my house. Because I knew one of the
architects that I was in the Army with, and he
worked for Neil Ford at that time. Who was that? He
was named Jerry Rogers. Okay. So Neil Ford
designed my first house. It was only a six-down,
beautiful house. Right on Timbercrest on North
McGregor in a beautiful wooded area. But what
happened, when the Supreme Court ruling came in, I
knew it was going to go all black. So then I moved to
Memorial into the Spring Branch School District,
because I just wanted to go ahead. I guess we had
seven, eight kids at that time, and we just wanted
to be sure we got a good decent education here. So
that's why I moved out to Memorial area. And then we
built a house in 65, which we finished in 65, a big
house up there. So anyway, by that time, I had gone
around the country. It seemed I was destroying the
nation, in my opinion. And how do you do it better?
So this is what we got thinking. I asked Carl
Cameron, I said, all right, Carl, and you pick, but
you'll see their names in the book. How many acres
would I need to build a town of 100,000? So they made
that sketch. And that sketch is fairly accurate of
what we did. So we moved before Pierre and Carl came
out and they said, you need 20,000 acres. We only
had 4,000 in that spot there. But see, I didn't
think that was the right spot. looked at the 1960
I-45 area, right where the corner was. 1960 I-45. I
actually optioned 2,500 acres at $2,500, which I
still have it now. But then I couldn't get the
10,000 to 15,000 acres I need on the option, so I
gave up on that sign. That was about in 67, 65, right
after Carl finished his math. Then I said, well,
the best place is, and we looked at where the
airport was going to be. We knew where the freeway
in the airport was going to be. I-45, and we knew
where the airport was going to be. We looked at the
sonic problem, because if you get too close to the
airport, you destroy the chance. We looked at the
freeway. We looked at the beauty of the woods. I had
lived in Memorial. I knew the Memorial. In fact,
one thing we found out by having this little pace at
a home thing, that if we had a lot on the west side of
town, and you had one with three trees and one with
no trees, the one with three trees would get you
$500 more. So we knew the value of the forest, the
beauty. That's why Memorial is so popular. In
1960, it was a hot thing at that time, but it's been
screwed up by a bunch of small tracks. It's a big
mess. It's like West Ham all over again. So we
didn't want to do that. If you don't really design
it properly, I didn't want to do it. So then we
turned around and said, okay. Carl Cameron did his
study. Then I started with Carl Charlie Lively to
start building the block. It took 300
transactions. to build a block. And you're trying
to, you're going for 20,000 acres, or you're...
Charles Lavery, I guess, you got all the data from
him in the first quarter. Yeah. So then I had to
build a block for 20,000 acres. And it was very
difficult going with the Catholic Church and with
the Celan Smith Foundation and with this fellow
McCann at Waco Bank in Woodsville. Gee, what a
terrible negotiation. Well, anyway, starting
about in 1969, We heard about the University of
Houston. We were building the block. We wanted to
build a north campus and a south campus. So we went
there, and they took them out before we'd ever done
anything. And they agreed that they would like to
have a site in the woodlands for the north campus.
That was 68, 69. We've got some history about that
in there. And then we retained. What I did then is I
went out to Columbia. First, I had sent people,
well, I went to Columbia first and decided to see
what Rouse was doing. I looked at all the West Coast
towns, Irvine, Westlake, Rancho Bernardo. But
how did you get into that? I still don't
understand. How you got into that new town,
community planning concept? I knew that it was
important for the nation. You see, Texas had
unusual rule, extraterritorial jurisdiction.
And I knew that if we're going to urbanize to five
million people, you better do it right. You're
going to destroy the area just like all these other
cities. They're all in trouble. Detroit,
Cleveland, you talk to them. They've got a central
core and a hundred subdivisions that can't get
along with each other. And they're destroyed.
They can't manage. Unless you respond to the
whole, you can't make it work. And that was the
concept I had. That's what I sold HUD on. Had you
done a lot of reading on this or meeting with people
other than through the young residents? Well,
naturally, no studying. When you see what caused
it, you perceive what was wrong. I perceived what
was wrong. with all the urbanization problems.
And therefore, I felt that this could be a
prototype, and it had flair as itself, of really
what should be done. The woodlands are really
unique in the country. There's nothing like it.
And the people will realize it in about 10, 15
years. All right, so then I went to Columbia,
talked to Jim Rouse. I looked at Levittown, which
is a mess. I looked at the, in fact, I went to the one
at the Chicago. Well, it hadn't started yet. What?
Park Forest. Yeah, Park Forest. It had started the
old section, but it hadn't started the new HUD
section. But I went all through. Westlake was the
upper class. I went through
Scotland and England and France. And all the new
towns there are worker towns. All the ones on the
west coast are upper class towns. Columbia,
Maryland was the best I'd seen. The rest of
Virginia was upper class. I'd looked at it, I'd
seen all of them. So I thought what I did then, so I
started hiring some of Rouse's people. Dick
Brown, Mike Richman,
Olen Ivins. I hired about 10 of them. So Rouse sent a
man down threatening to sue me if I didn't quit
hiring. Petito. So I said, okay, Jim, I won't hire
anymore. And then we started building a team
together because no one in this country had done
anything of this magnitude of this like that we've
talked of. We'd seen what they were doing. We'd
watched the Kingwood thing was getting started by
that time. We lost out on that. But no one did the
amount of planning we did. We had social structure
studies done by social artists. And that's one of
the unusual things about all of this. Texas
developers never did that. We had all the bishops
together with me to plan the concept. Then we hired
Ian McHarrig because he was the most important
environmental planner in the world at that time,
in my opinion. And where did you get into McHart,
for example? Well, for an instant, Bob
Hartsfield, who I had as my planning director at
that time. And then where did Hartsfield come
from? McHart was his instructor at the University
of Pennsylvania. He said, before you decide who
you're going to do your work, I want you to do one
thing. I want you to read the book Design with
Nature. Yeah, I remember seeing that reference,
yeah. I did. So then I said, all right, MacArthur,
would you come with us to do this project? And he
said, well, he jumped at the chance, you see. And
then I said, well, who want to do the master plan? He
said he would do the environmental studies. And
then the master plan, and I looked at all of them. I
looked at two or three on the West Coast. Nobody in
this part of the country had enough experience to
do it, the type of master plan I wanted done. So I
looked all over the country, and I found out that
Pereira had done more. He had done more. He did
Irvine. He did one in Iran at that time. He was doing
that. I even talked to Doxiades, the Greek.
planner at that time. But I couldn't feel I could
come over here and be connected with him. But he had
done some great work in all of Europe, you see. So
then. But you'd given this an awful lot of, that's
what amazes me about the whole, that you've cast
your net worldwide already. Because if you want to
make it something so different and so important,
you had to really get the best talent or the best
thought you could get anywhere and try to
amalgamate into what we're talking about trying
to put together. So then we had, oh man, we had
meetings with the environmentalists. In other
words, McCarrick came in before Prairie River
started, and he brought ten scientists along with
him. He usually retained them here. He had A&M. We
did infrared, you know, photography on it. And we
knew all the trees. We knew where to put the lines.
We knew where to put the golf course and things like
that. McCarrick with Rice did our drainage, which
had been remarkably good. I'll tell you, Joe,
earlier that we've had three big storms since when
we had ten-inch rains. Yeah, almost had one this
morning coming through. So we have done, and we did
what to protect the wildlife, et cetera, et
cetera. And we did that before you ever heard. We
wrote the first environmental impact statement
ever done by HUD. And they use it as a model for other
projects like that. So this is what we did because
McHarg spent one year on concern about the
environment before we did any master planning
that Prairie did. And then we put the plan together
with McHarg. And surprisingly, it worked out well
with Prairie and McHarg. We haven't changed too
much conflict and how you preserve the trees, and
how you preserve the wildlife, et cetera. All
those things were thought of early on. And this is
what no one had done before that time, and
therefore. But then how do you urbanize, which is
what's important that we got Houston to do? When we
finally put all the block together, the full
25,000, we've got some here maybe just five or six
years ago, the last pieces. And we've got some now
on the south side of the creek. We're trying to
build a big lake. That'll be the next 10 years. How
do you put this block together, but then how do you
really be part of the whole? So Houston and Texas
have a unique block called Exeterritory
Jurisdiction. If the five-mile boundary from the
city limits touched your land here, and it barely
touched our southern boundary, then you can ask
the city of Houston to take the whole 25,000 acres
into their Exeterritory Jurisdiction, which
means that no one can incorporate unless Houston
approves it. Now, what that means is that as you
urbanize, if we and I live there and Joe lives
there, we don't make Houston work. We shouldn't be
parasailing at the airport and the port and NASA
and all that other stuff. We, those of us, because
what was destroying all our towns in the country
that I saw, the flight to the suburb of the town and
the tax base was killing all the towns. And they'd
get out in their little political subterfuge, and
they could care less about New York City, et
cetera. Or around Washington. They could care
less about Washington, D.C. And that lack of
carelessness and not being concerned is what's
destroying all our cities. If your talent, and
unfortunately the talent is mostly in the Anglo
world at this time, until things happen as time
goes on, that talent flees to the suburbs. It's
going to destroy all your cities. The Woodlands
can't do that. Those that have talent in the
Woodlands, if I have any talent or Joe has any
talent, may kind of make Houston work. Because
Houston should never let that go. So this was part
of your initial plan, is that what you did there is
going to be part of the city. Now, let me say this.
The people in the Woodlands don't like that. No,
because that's not typical. They keep coming up a
little bit. And the threat is, if you do this,
Houston will make you prematurely, and you'll
really get cut to pieces but you know that's the
thing that that they would like to have what really
what people want they don't want to live downtown
in 610 loop some people will maybe four or five
percent they want to want really particularly if
you have any family the quality of urban life to be
part of the whole that's what people want to be and
that's the concept i have what they really want to
be is part of the whole but have the quality of
lifestyle that you may be left with. And then we
build a job base. We worked on studies about the
commercial side and the high-tech side. And we're
going to someday make it going to be similar to
Research Forest and part of the area there. I mean,
Research Triangle. So that's a concept that's all
coming together. That is very complex and very
difficult to execute. You can see the trouble I had
in the first 15 years is terrible. At what point did
your concept of having an economically
integrated community begin to develop? In other
words, having the jobs there for the families
to... Let me say this. The first exercise we did, we
did a three-legged stool. Joe, you have that
slide. We put on there that what urbanization
should be is where you really have the
environment, Man-to-man relationship in
economics. And if they don't all work together,
they won't work. If you take one leg off, it won't
work. Now, this is a concept we started at the very
beginning. And when we used to give a slide, we'd
say, Joe, I'd use that as the concept that we put
together. So you've really got now, knowing this,
these projects are very difficult. In fact, you
don't start turning them around for 10 years. And
major companies don't want to tackle them because
they're earning the next quarter. You've got to
have a long-range and mid-range thought to make it
work. Hopefully, we had energy to help us over the
rough spots, and it still helps us over the rough
spots. If you didn't have energy, you could never
do these projects. Because HUD's projects, you
see, I found out about HUD's program about in 70, I
think it was. Found out that it had the new
Community Act. We had looked at the Title VII deal,
which was not as good. Then we went to the Title X.
which gave up to $50 million. We convinced HUD that
this is the best project they've ever seen. And
they won. They did. It's the largest grant. A
guarantee. It wasn't a grant. A guarantee. They
have no damn grant. They did give us some grants for
subsidized roads and subsidized housing. But the
$50 million was a guaranteed loan. We had to pay it
back. We still pay it back. We had a schedule. But we
don't know if we'll ever survive. So I kid HUD all
the time. I said, don't feel so bad. We're going to
survive. You've got two others that might survive
with you helping the bank run. That's 3 out of 13.
Hell, every... I had it every 10 o'clock. I'd only
hit one. You're doing pretty good. You got three
out of 13, but they don't, they go tell the
Congress. They don't have any guts. Well, what was
the problem, the HUD problem? I mean, why
didn't... See, if the HUD had a 13 project, I would
say nine were ill-conceived. Yeah. Politics.
Yeah. Or under the airport like the flower man was
under the Dallas airport. Yeah. I mean, they just,
the concept, see, we studied the woods. We knew the
woods would bring people. Yeah. They loved to live
in the woods. Yeah, sure. We knew that I-45 was
being built. It wouldn't start. It wouldn't
finish it right by the Woodlands. We had to have
that to access to Houston. We studied the whole
airport. It wouldn't finish yet. We knew what the
sonic situation was going to be around the
intercontinental airport. They hadn't finished
the airport. They just started working on it by
that time. So we studied all those things to make it
work. Because any one of those could have been a
serious flaw to destroy the project. And so we
tried to figure out what the flaws may have been.
And yet, you know, it's still a long way. We're not
sure. We think it'll be . What about the research
component of this? Where'd that come from? Well,
what we did early on is that the University of
Houston here is 400 acres for your north campus.
And then we got to thinking, since they were very
slow and the legislature would not approve it, A&M
fought them all the time. Too near A&M. See what I
mean? Yeah, more. Kill us. Dennis and I, why don't
we get the four universities together? And then
that's when I went ahead off a little, make a study.
Is it feasible? And we looked at, I looked at the
case history. If you ever looked at the case
history of Stanford Research or Research
Triangle, it's like the perils of Pauline. And I
looked at all, I just read all the case histories of
those projects. And I felt that they came back off a
little study, which we paid $300,000, said it's
feasible if you get those four universities to
agree. So I went to A&M and Rice and U of H Board of
Regents, and they agreed, OK, we will try to do this
project that we could do together better than we
can envision. So after I got them on, I asked A&M, is
it all right if I go get UT Austin? All right, go
ahead. So who are you talking to, incidentally, at
A&M? Oh, I've forgotten who was present that time.
William? No, it was before my first time. Jack
Williams? I got approval back in 80, I think it was,
or 79, 80. I had to go to the board. I went up there and
saw, I guess it was Miller or whoever it was I saw. I
have to go back to the record. Probably Miller.
Whoever it was, I went two or three trips up there
and said, all right, let's bring him for the board.
U of H was going to conduct a hawk. But you got a
pretty good reception. Oh, yeah, I got a good
reception. You should have. And they knew I was a
strong Aggie and I would protect Aggie's
interests. And then when I got UT, they agreed to
let UT come in. Really, the super conductor, Super
Cloud, you wouldn't have it if we hadn't had the
work. I had those four universities together,
working with Peter McIntyre and myself. And
Peter, of course, is the godfather. And then I
helped put the first money together for them to
make it work. Otherwise, Texas would never have
had that $8 billion project. So those are things
that in the next 20, 10 years, if you're going to
write about it, it's very important. And then
also, we're going to be working on it. But why,
again, research? Was research supposed to give
you a certain style of life or quality of life or an
economic base? Where did you get that from? Let me
give you an opinion. I studied the research
triangle in North Carolina and went over there.
Yeah, which is really beautiful. And I studied the
history, how difficult it was to get it started.
Governor Hodge had a terrible time getting it
started. But those three universities helped
make it work, and then the people made it work. The
whole state worked at it. Here you've got a state
that's divided between the Panhandle area, the
San Antonio area, and the Houston area. You can't
get everybody to go together. The Dallas-Fort
Worth area, of course, is part of the North Texas
area. That's about the hardest area. So
therefore, we have to say you go regional basis.
But then I think that what we think can be done here
is that if I get these four universities to
cooperate, and that's not very hard, even A&M. You
give it 10 or 20 or 30 years, it could be as important
for this region as Texas Medical Center. And
people don't believe that. It's another level
higher than each university. If you can get the
private sector engaged with the universities,
which they can't do very well. They can't do that
very well. And we can. We've already done about
nine venture capital companies. It's already
there. MDNs with A&M, with Baylor, with
University of Technical Science. We helped put
together the research for us, as we call it. We used
the Advanced Research Center, the full
university, the collaborative. We've got LSU
now. We're trying to get others to be
collaborating. Those are things that you build a
critical. We've got about 1,000 scientists now.
When we get 5,000 scientists, it'll really,
really take off. And I think this is important for
the region and the whole region.